CPS-0012? | Query Layer Standardization (#625)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CPS-0012/README.md

Having accepted standards drastically reduces the complexity and cost for new providers to develop.
This creates a query layer marketplace where providers can be more easily compared by customers.

## Use cases

### Multi-Provider Wallets
Wallets may wish to allow users to bring their own data layer provider.
By having a standard interface wallets would be able to support this, which would reduce the wallet's operating costs.
For the users this gives them flexibility, redundancy and the option to run their wallet on their own infrastructure. 

### DApps Avoiding Lock-In
DApp developers don't want to tie their infrastructure to one query layer provider.
By being able to switch providers without the need for significant engineering, they can avoid providers which do not offer fair pricing.

### New Infrastructure Providers
New Cardano infrastructure providers want to be able join pools of interchangeable query layer suppliers.

> Without standardization new providers must invest significant time to develop their own.  

Author: ```suggestion
Without standardization new providers must invest significant time to develop their own backends (including APIs).
```

## Goals

1. Create an extensive query layer API specification that is not tied to any particular implementation

> 2. Describe how can it be used in different contexts: HTTP API, JavaScript interfaces, ???

Author: ```suggestion
2. Describe how can it be used in different contexts: HTTP API, JavaScript interfaces, browser-based wallets, standalone wallets, dApp backends.
```

Tight coupling between wallets and query layers results in unnecessary economic burden imposed on wallets, and forces them to make opinionated choices (of query layer provider) that could otherwise be delegated to the end user, similarly to how it is done in Metamask with RPC provider selection.

The economic burden, in turn, results in discouraging of innovation in the wallet ecosystem, because there is a very strong pressure to keep wallet standards minimal coming from wallet providers.

Another downside of tight coupling between wallets and query layers is that, unlike Ethereum wallets, Cardano wallets can't be used to interact with dApps deployed to custom (private) testnets. Only public testnets are supported, and as a result in order to simply test a dApp end-to-end, it must be deployed to a public testnet. This is a privacy concern for dApp developers, because making on-chain contracts available publicly (although in a compiled form) before they are officially open-sourced can be seen as data breach.

### Centralization and Ecosystem Risks

> Inability to interchange query layer providers results in vendor lock-in. Query layer providers are disincentivized to opensource their infrastructure setup or provide a competitive service. Dependency on a fixed set of entities to run the infrastructure makes it easier for adversaries to attack dApps by taking over the infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inability to interchange query layer providers results in vendor lock-in. Query layer providers are disincentivized to opensource their infrastructure setup or provide a competitive service. Dependency on a fixed set of entities to run the infrastructure makes it easier for adversaries to attack dApps by taking over the infrastructure.
```
grammar

Having accepted standards drastically reduces the complexity and cost for new providers to develop.
This creates a query layer marketplace where providers can be more easily compared by customers.

### Barriers to adoption

Such a standard could likely face resistance to adoption.

> The potential risk for commercial offerings adopting this standard is the loss of an ability to diverentiate themselves from competitors via data shape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The potential risk for commercial offerings adopting this standard is the loss of the ability to differentiate themselves from competitors via data shape.
```
grammar and spelling

Differentiating themselves via data shape is useful in two ways for query layer providers.

> Firstly, data providers each use their own unique infrastructure making costs of the same query are not uniform between providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, data providers each use their own unique infrastructure, so the costs of the same query are not uniform between providers.
```
improve flow

> By adjusting query shape providers can adjust queries to suit their architecture, ensuring speed and reducing cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By adjusting query shape, providers can adjust queries to suit their architecture, ensuring speed and reducing cost.
```

Secondly, is the potential monetary advantages.
Without a standard commercial providers are able to shape their data in a way to attract customers.

> A provider's business model maybe to charge per request, this incentives them to keep the data small to increase the amount of queries by customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A provider's business model may be to charge per request, which incentivises them to keep the data small to increase the number of queries by customers.
```
improved flow

A standardized set of queries would reduce the ability for providers to do this.

#### Mitigation

> To mitigate the impact of varying provider architecture, authors of solutions should seek to involve query layer providers in development of a standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mitigate the impact of varying provider architectures, authors of solutions should seek to involve query layer providers in the development of a standard.
```

This will allow providers to voice concerns over potentially expensive or awkward queries.

To address loss of avenue for differentiation, via data shape standard authors should seek to ensure there are other ways in which providers can differentiate.
These could be built into the standard such as optional batching, allowing providers to offer tiers of batching support for their endpoints.

## Use cases

### Multi-Provider Wallets

> Wallets may wish to allow users to bring their own data layer provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wallets may wish to allow users to bring their own data layer provider (on public or custom networks).
```

---
CPS: 12
Title: Query Layer Standardization
Status: Open
Category: Tools
Authors:
    - Vladimir Kalnitsky <vladimir@mlabs.city>
Proposed Solutions: []
Discussions:
    - https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/625

>     - `#wallet-connectors` in CIP editors Discord: https://discord.gg/tkp6r6ESJR

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
To be further referenced in _Problem_ section.

Cardano lacks a standardized query layer. This leads to suboptimal tooling, dApp and wallet architecture.

## Problem

### Query Layers and Tooling

Lack of a standardized query layer results in multiple different implementations of roughly the same set of functionality:

- [Blockfrost](https://blockfrost.io/)
- [Koios](https://www.koios.rest/)
- [Maestro](https://www.gomaestro.org)
- [Ogmios](https://ogmios.dev/)

As a result, there is a need to support multiple incompatible APIs in downstream tools, examples of which are:

- [Mesh.js](https://meshjs.dev/providers)
- [Lucid](https://lucid.spacebudz.io/)
- [cardano-transaction-library](https://github.com/Plutonomicon/cardano-transaction-lib/blob/develop/doc/runtime.md)

Query layer providers are not identical, which means that the *promise* of abstracting away from a particular query layer provider completely, that an offchain library may want to give to its users, will either be left *unfulfilled* (i.e. some features will work with some providers, but not others) or the scope of the downstream API will have to be *reduced* to the very minimum that is covered by every supported query layer.

### Query Layers and Wallets

> This CPS initiative originated in the discussion about [Extensive Wallet Standard CIP](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/620) in [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/971785110770831360/992011119872970762/1176567729017327737) ([invite](https://discord.gg/P59aNVN8zu)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CPS initiative originated in the discussion about [Extensive Wallet Standard CIP](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/620) on the CIP Discord server ([invite](https://discord.gg/P59aNVN8zu))
in the [`#general`](https://discord.com/channels/971785110770831360/992011119872970762/1176567729017327737) channel, continuing in a dedicated [`#query-layer-standard`](https://discord.com/channels/971785110770831360/1178763938389823598) channel.
```
Will have to commit this now so I can verify that the formatting is correct... feel free to modify afterward.
